Offline install docs (#512)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/snap/howto/install/install-offline.md

# Installing Canonical Kubernetes Offline or in an air gapped environment

There are situations where it is necessary or desirable to run Canonical 
Kubernetes on a machine that is not connected to the internet. 
Based on different degrees of separation from the network,
different solutions are offered to accomplish this goal.
This guide explains the necessary preparation required for the

> offline installation and walks you through the different potential scenarios.

Reviewer: This text should be useful for people that look to install on airgap environments, and is not every effective at that as written. Also, we should avoid _talking directly_ to the person. 

Perhaps something like this would work better:

> This guide explains the necessary extra preparation that is needed for airgap deployments, as well the steps that are needed to successfully deploy Canonical Kubernetes in such environments.

## Prepare for Deployment

In preparation for the offline deployment you will download the Canonical
Kubernetes snap, fulfill the networking requirements based on your scenario and
handle images for workloads and Canonical Kubernetes features.

### Prep 1: Download the Canonical Kubernetes snap

From a machine with access to the internet download the following:

```bash
sudo snap download k8s --channel 1.30-classic/beta --basename k8s
sudo snap download core20 --basename core20
```

The [core20][Core20] and `k8s` snap are downloaded. `core20.assert` and 
`k8s.assert` are necessary to verify the integrity of the snap packages.

```{note} 
Update the version of k8s by adjusting the channel parameter.
For more information on channels visit the
[channels explanation](/snap/explanation/channels.md).
```

```{note}
With updates to the snap the base core is subject to change in the future.
```

### Prep 2: Network Requirements

Air-gap deployments are typically associated with a number of constraints and
restrictions when it comes to
the networking connectivity of the machines.

> Below we discuss the requirements that the deployment needs to fulfill.

Reviewer: please do not add unnecessary line breaks

Reviewer: also in other places below

Reviewer 2: :information_source:  If you are using VSCode/Codium, Alt-Q will reflow the current paragraph

In many cases, the nodes of the airgap deployment may not have direct access to
upstream registries, but can reach them through the
[use of an HTTP proxy][proxy].

The configuration of the proxy is out of the scope of this documentation.

#### Images Option B: private registry mirror

In case regulations and/or network constraints do not allow the cluster nodes
to access any upstream image registry,
it is typical to deploy a private registry mirror.
This is an image registry service that contains all the required OCI Images
(e.g. [registry](https://distribution.github.io/distribution/),
[Harbor](https://goharbor.io/) or any other OCI registry) and
is reachable from all cluster nodes.

This requires three steps:

1. Deploy and secure the registry service. This is out of the scope for this
   document, please follow the instructions for the registry
   that you want to deploy.
2. Using [regsync][regsync], load all images from the upstream source and
   push to your registry mirror.
3. Configure the Canonical Kubernetes container runtime (`containerd`) to load 
   images from
   the private registry mirror instead of the upstream source. This will be

>    described in the installation section.

Reviewer: link to the section instead.

> In order to load images into the private registry, you need a machine with
> access to both the upstream registry (e.g. `docker.io`) and the internal one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to load images into the private registry, you need a machine with
access to both any upstream registries (e.g. `docker.io`) and the private mirror. 
```

##### Load images with regsync

We recommend using [regsync][regsync] to copy images
from the upstream registry to your private registry.

For the images used in the k8s-snap we currently sync upstream images

> to `ghcr.io/canonical`.

Reviewer: be careful with this wording. `ghcr.io/canonical` is not a repo. the repo is `ghcr.io` and `canonical/....`, e.g. `canonical/k8s-snap/pause` is the path to the images.

This is important because we do not every configure a mirror registry just for `ghcr.io/canonical/..` images. The mirror is for all of `ghcr.io`.

Since you will need to do something similar you
will find it helpful to look at the [upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] file
as well as the [sync-images][sync-images] script.

In [upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] you will have to
change the sync target from `ghcr.io/canonical` to your private registry mirror.

After you have updated the yaml file, you can run the [sync-images][sync-images]
script:

```bash
USERNAME="$username" PASSWORD="$password" ./sync-images.sh

> ```

Reviewer: This is not sufficient, as it does not cover our rocks. Instead, we should point people to use `k8s list-images` to get the full list of images (or look inside the download snap and check for the `images.txt` file).

Then, we should provide an example file, similar to `upstream-images.yaml`, that syncs images _from_ `ghcr.io` to the target mirror (which can also be configured through env. This can look like this:

```yaml
sync:
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10'
    type: image
  # ....
```

#### Images Option C: Side-load images

Image side-loading is the process of loading all required OCI images directly
into the container runtime, so that they do not have to be fetched at runtime.

To create a bundle of images, you can use the [regctl][regctl] tool.

```bash

> regctl image export --platform=local

Reviewer: the correct way to invoke this would be through our tools, or point people to the upstream instructions instead.

```bash
./src/k8s/tools/regctl.sh ...
```

Two more notes for this section:
- The supplied command does not work, as it needs an image to sync (e.g. `ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10`) as well as a target path.
- This section should not explain what side-loading is. Instead, it should document that:

> An alternative to configuring a registry mirror is to download all necessary OCI images, and then manually add them to all cluster nodes. Instructions for this are described in `[link to section]`.

```

Upon choosing this option, you place all images under
`/var/snap/k8s/common/images` and they will be picked up by containerd.

## Deploy Canonical Kubernetes

Now that you have fulfilled all steps in preparation for your
air gapped cluster, it is time to get it deployed.

### Step 1: Install Canonical Kubernetes

Copy the `k8s.snap`, `k8s.assert`, `core20.snap` and `core20.assert` files into
the target node, then install the k8s snap by running:

```bash
sudo snap ack core20.assert && sudo snap install ./core20.snap
sudo snap ack k8s.assert && sudo snap install ./k8s.snap --classic
```

Repeat the above for all nodes of the cluster.

> ### Step 2: Form Canonical Kubernetes cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Bootstrap cluster
```

no_proxy variables as described in the
[adding proxy configuration section][proxy].

#### Container Runtime Option B: Configure registry mirrors

This requires that you have already setup a registry mirror,
as explained in the preparation section on the private registry mirror.
For each upstream registry that you want to mirror, create a hosts.toml file.

This example configured `http://10.100.100.100:5000` as a mirror for
`docker.io`.
We edit 
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`
and make sure it looks like this:

##### HTTP registry

In `/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`
add the configuration:

```
[host."http://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
```

##### HTTPS registry

HTTPS requires that you additionally specify the registry CA certificate.
Copy the certificate to
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/ca.crt`,

Then add your config in
`/var/snap/microk8s/current/args/certs.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`:

```
[host."https://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
ca = "/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/ca.crt"

> ```

Reviewer: NOTE: this should be configured in a bootstrap configuration file, not extra steps after bootstrapping the node.

Reviewer: _for now_, just like the comment about image side-loading: these steps should be done _before_ bootstrapping the node.

Similarly, we should document that these steps are needed on all cluster nodes.

#### Container Runtime Option C: Side-load images

Copy the `images.tar` file(s) to `/var/snap/k8s/common/images`

> on each cluster node.

Reviewer: This should be a step before installing the snap.

Add a step **before** the cluster installation, that would look like this:

```
## Side-load images

This is only required if you have followed (.. link ..). Make sure that the directory `/var/snap/k8s/common/images` directory exists, then copy all `$image.tar` to that directory, such that containerd automatically picks them up and imports them when it starts.
```

# Installing Canonical Kubernetes in airgapped environments

There are situations where it is necessary or desirable to run Canonical 
Kubernetes on a machine that is not connected to the internet. 
Based on different degrees of separation from the network,
different solutions are offered to accomplish this goal.
This guide documents any necessary extra preparation for airgap deployments,
as well the steps that are needed to successfully deploy Canonical Kubernetes
in such environments.

## Prepare for Deployment

In preparation for the offline deployment you will download the Canonical
Kubernetes snap, fulfill the networking requirements based on your scenario and
handle images for workloads and Canonical Kubernetes features.

> ### Prep 1: Download the Canonical Kubernetes snap

Reviewer 3: I'd remove those `Prep x` prefixes.

> From a machine with access to the internet download the following:

Reviewer 3: ... download the `k8s` and `core20` snap with:

```bash

> sudo snap download k8s --channel 1.30-classic/beta --basename k8s

Reviewer 3: The `1` is weirdly rendered in the final doc. Not sure how to avoid that, @evilnick maybe?

Author: I think adding `bash` does something funny to the formatting?

Reviewer 2: bash is only for bash **scripts** , not cli commands. Just leave off the type

sudo snap download core20 --basename core20
```

> The [core20][Core20] and `k8s` snap are downloaded. `core20.assert` and 

Reviewer 3: You can remove this sentence if you add the above edits.

> `k8s.assert` are necessary to verify the integrity of the snap packages.

Reviewer 3: Besides the snaps, this will also download the corresponding `assert` files which are necessary to verify the integrity of the packages.

```{note} 
Update the version of k8s by adjusting the channel parameter.
For more information on channels visit the
[channels explanation](/snap/explanation/channels.md).
```

```{note}
With updates to the snap the base core is subject to change in the future.
```

### Prep 2: Network Requirements

> Air-gap deployments are typically associated with a number of constraints and

Reviewer 3: You use `Air-gap` and `airgap` in the document. I'd suggest to settle on one.

restrictions when it comes to the networking connectivity of the machines.
Below we discuss the requirements that the deployment needs to fulfill.

#### Cluster node communication
<!-- TODO: Add Services and Ports Doc -->
Ensure that all cluster nodes are reachable from each other.
<!-- Refer to [Services and ports][svc-ports] used for a list of all network
ports used by Canonical Kubernetes.  -->

#### Ensure proxy access

This section is only relevant if access to upstream image registries

> (e.g. docker.io, quay.io, rocks.canonical.com, etc)

Reviewer 3: nit: etc.

> is only allowed through an HTTP proxy (e.g. squid).

Reviewer 3: maybe make `squid` a link

Ensure that all nodes can use the proxy to access the image registry.
For example, if using `http://squid.internal:3128` to access docker.io,
an easy way to test connectivity is:

```
export https_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128
curl -v https://registry-1.docker.io/v2
```

> Please refer to the next section `images` on how to use the HTTP proxy

Reviewer 3: I'd just remove this sentence. The `images` section is right under it.

to allow limited access to image registries.

### Prep 3: Images

All workloads in a Kubernetes cluster are running as an OCI image.
Kubernetes needs to be able to fetch these images and load them
into the container runtime, in order to run workloads.
For a Canonical Kubernetes deployment, you will need to fetch the images
used by its features (network, dns, etc) as well as any images that are
needed to run your workloads.

The following options are presented in the order of
increasing complexity of implementation.
You may also find it helpful to combine these options for your scenario.

> If you already have a running cluster,

Reviewer 3: You don't need a running cluster to execute this command. It is enough to just snap install it.

you can list the images in use by running:

```bash
sudo k8s list-images
```

A list of images can also be found in the downloaded k8s snap for the
`images.txt` file.

Please remember to keep track of the images used by your workloads as well.

#### Images Option A: via an HTTP proxy

In many cases, the nodes of the airgap deployment may not have direct access to
upstream registries, but can reach them through the
[use of an HTTP proxy][proxy].

The configuration of the proxy is out of the scope of this documentation.

#### Images Option B: private registry mirror

In case regulations and/or network constraints do not allow the cluster nodes
to access any upstream image registry,
it is typical to deploy a private registry mirror.
This is an image registry service that contains all the required OCI Images
(e.g. [registry](https://distribution.github.io/distribution/),
[Harbor](https://goharbor.io/) or any other OCI registry) and
is reachable from all cluster nodes.

This requires three steps:

> 1. Deploy and secure the registry service. This is out of the scope for this

Reviewer 3: I'd remove "This is out of scope for this document". "Follow the instructions for your registry" should be good.

   document, please follow the instructions for the registry
   that you want to deploy.
2. Using [regsync][regsync], load all images from the upstream source and
   push to your registry mirror.
3. Configure the Canonical Kubernetes container runtime (`containerd`) to load 
   images from
   the private registry mirror instead of the upstream source. This will be
   described in the 
   [Configure registry mirrors](
      #Container-Runtime-Option-B:-Configure-registry-mirrors) section.

In order to load images into the private registry, you need a machine with
access to both any upstream registries (e.g. `docker.io`)
and the private mirror.

##### Load images with regsync

We recommend using [regsync][regsync] to copy images
from the upstream registry to your private registry.

> For the images used in the k8s-snap we currently sync upstream images

Reviewer 3: I'd make all of this one paragraph. The rendered result looks a bit stretched.

to the `ghcr.io` repo.

Since you will need to do something similar you
will find it helpful to look at the [upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] file
as well as the [sync-images][sync-images] script.

In [upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] you will have to
change the sync target to your private registry mirror.

```yaml
sync:
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10'
    type: image
```

After you have updated the yaml file, you can run the [sync-images][sync-images]
script:

```bash
./src/k8s/tools/regctl.sh USERNAME="$username" PASSWORD="$password" MIRROR="$mirror"
```

#### Images Option C: Side-load images

Image side-loading is the process of loading all required OCI images directly
into the container runtime, so that they do not have to be fetched at runtime.

To create a bundle of images, you can use the [regctl][regctl] tool.

```bash
regctl image export --platform=local
```

Upon choosing this option, you place all images under
`/var/snap/k8s/common/images` and they will be picked up by containerd.

## Deploy Canonical Kubernetes

Now that you have fulfilled all steps in preparation for your

> air gapped cluster, it is time to get it deployed.

Reviewer 3: `airgapped` cluster, it is time to deploy it.

### Step 1: Install Canonical Kubernetes

Copy the `k8s.snap`, `k8s.assert`, `core20.snap` and `core20.assert` files into
the target node, then install the k8s snap by running:

```bash
sudo snap ack core20.assert && sudo snap install ./core20.snap
sudo snap ack k8s.assert && sudo snap install ./k8s.snap --classic
```

Repeat the above for all nodes of the cluster.

### Step 3: Container Runtime

> The container runtime needs to be configured to be ble to fetch images.

Reviewer 3: nit: able

#### Container Runtime Option A: Configure HTTP proxy for registries

Edit `/etc/systemd/system/snap.k8s.containerd.conf.d/env.conf`
and set the appropriate http_proxy, https_proxy and
no_proxy variables as described in the
[adding proxy configuration section][proxy].

#### Container Runtime Option B: Configure registry mirrors

This requires that you have already setup a registry mirror,
as explained in the preparation section on the private registry mirror.

> For each upstream registry that you want to mirror, create a hosts.toml file.

Reviewer 3: you have highlighted all files. Please do it also for `hosts.toml`.

This example configured `http://10.100.100.100:5000` as a mirror for
`docker.io`.
We edit 
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`
and make sure it looks like this:

##### HTTP registry

In `/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`
add the configuration:

```
[host."http://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
```

##### HTTPS registry

HTTPS requires that you additionally specify the registry CA certificate.
Copy the certificate to
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/ca.crt`,

Then add your config in
`/var/snap/microk8s/current/args/certs.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`:

```
[host."https://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
ca = "/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/ca.crt"
```

#### Container Runtime Option C: Side-load images

Copy the `images.tar` file(s) to `/var/snap/k8s/common/images`
on each cluster node.

### Step 2: Bootstrap cluster

Now, bootstrap the cluster and replace `MY-NODE-IP` with the IP of the node
by running the command:

```bash
sudo k8s bootstrap --address MY-NODE-IP
```

```{note}

> Please skip the following section for one node deployments.

Reviewer 3: I'd remove this. It is obvious for the user that the following only applies to multinode clusters.

   described in the [Configure registry mirrors](
      #Container-Runtime-Option-B:-Configure-registry-mirrors) section.

In order to load images into the private registry, you need a machine with
access to both any upstream registries (e.g. `docker.io`)
and the private mirror.

##### Load images with regsync

We recommend using [regsync][regsync] to copy images
from the upstream registry to your private registry.
For the images used in the k8s-snap we currently sync upstream images
to the `ghcr.io` repo.
Since you will need to do something similar you
will find it helpful to look at the [upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] file
as well as the [sync-images][sync-images] script.

In [upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] you will have to
change the sync target to your private registry mirror.

```yaml
sync:
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10'
    type: image
```

After you have updated the yaml file, use [regctl][regctl] to sync the images.
Run the [sync-images][sync-images] script:

```bash
./src/k8s/tools/regctl.sh USERNAME="$username" PASSWORD="$password" \
MIRROR="$mirror"

> ```

Reviewer: `regsync` syncs images between repos.

`regctl` can download images as tar files.

An alternative to configuring a registry mirror is to download all necessary
OCI images, and then manually add them to all cluster nodes.
Instructions for this are described in
[Side-load images](#images-option-c-side-load-images).

#### Images Option C: Side-load images

Image side-loading is the process of loading all required OCI images directly
into the container runtime, so that they do not have to be fetched at runtime.

To create a bundle of images, you can use the [regctl][regctl] tool
or simply invoke the [regctl.sh][regctl.sh] script.

```bash

> ./src/k8s/tools/regctl.sh image export --platform=local

Reviewer: this example does not work, as it needs an image to fetch

<!-- Refer to [Services and ports][svc-ports] used for a list of all network
ports used by Canonical Kubernetes.  -->

#### Default Gateway

In cases where the air-gap environment does not have a default gateway,
add a dummy default route on interface eth0 using the following command:

```bash
ip route add default dev eth0
```

```{note} 
Ensure that `eth0` is the name of the default network interface used for
pod-to-pod communication.
```

```{note} 
The dummy gateway will only be used by the Kubernetes services to 
know which interface to use, actual connectivity to the internet is not 
required. Ensure that the dummy gateway rule survives a node reboot.
```

#### Ensure proxy access

This section is only relevant if access to upstream image registries
(e.g. docker.io, quay.io, rocks.canonical.com, etc.)
is only allowed through an HTTP proxy (e.g. [squid][squid]).

Ensure that all nodes can use the proxy to access the image registry.
For example, if using `http://squid.internal:3128` to access docker.io,
an easy way to test connectivity is:

```
export https_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128
curl -v https://registry-1.docker.io/v2
```

### Images

> All workloads in a Kubernetes cluster are running as an OCI image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All workloads in a Kubernetes cluster are run as an OCI image.
```

Kubernetes needs to be able to fetch these images and load them

> into the container runtime, in order to run workloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
into the container runtime.
```

> For a Canonical Kubernetes deployment, it is necessary to fetch the images used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Canonical Kubernetes, it is also necessary to fetch the images used
```

> by its features (network, dns, etc) as well as any images that are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by its features (network, dns, etc.) as well as any images that are
```

needed to run specific workloads.

```{note} 
The image options are presented in the order of
increasing complexity of implementation.
It may be helpful to combine these options for different scenarios.
```

#### List images

If the `k8s` snap is already installed,
list the images in use with the following command:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
```

into the container runtime, so they do not have to be fetched at runtime.

To create a bundle of images, use the [regctl][regctl] tool
or invoke the [regctl.sh][regctl.sh] script:

```
./src/k8s/tools/regctl.sh image export ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10 \
--platform=local > pause.tar
```

Upon choosing this option, place all images under
`/var/snap/k8s/common/images` and they will be picked up by containerd.

## Deploy Canonical Kubernetes

Once you've completed all the preparatory steps for your air-gapped cluster,
you can proceed with the deployment.

### Step 1: Install Canonical Kubernetes

Transfer the following files to the target node:

- `k8s.snap`
- `k8s.assert`
- `core20.snap`
- `core20.assert`

On the target node, run the following command to install the Kubernetes snap:

```
sudo snap ack core20.assert && sudo snap install ./core20.snap
sudo snap ack k8s.assert && sudo snap install ./k8s.snap --classic
```

Repeat the above for all nodes of the cluster.

### Step 2: Container Runtime

The container runtime must be configured to fetch images properly.
Choose one of the following options:

#### Container Runtime Option A: Configure HTTP proxy for registries

> Edit the `/etc/systemd/system/snap.k8s.containerd.service.d/http-proxy.conf`

Reviewer: nit; "create or edit"

file on each node and set the appropriate http_proxy, https_proxy and
no_proxy variables as described in the
[adding proxy configuration section][proxy].

#### Container Runtime Option B: Configure registry mirrors

This requires having already set up a registry mirror,
as explained in the preparation section on the private registry mirror.
Complete the following instructions on all nodes.
For each upstream registry that needs mirroring, create a `hosts.toml` file.
Here's an example that configures `http://10.100.100.100:5000` as a mirror for 
`ghcr.io`:

##### HTTP registry

In `/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/ghcr.io/hosts.toml`
add the configuration:

```

> [host."http://10.100.100.100:5000"]

Reviewer: nit; let's use the same address as above

capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
```

##### HTTPS registry

HTTPS requires the additionally specification of the registry CA certificate.
Copy the certificate to
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/ghcr.io/ca.crt`.
Then add the configuration in 
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/ghcr.io/hosts.toml`:

```
[host."https://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
ca = "/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/ghcr.io/ca.crt"
```

#### Container Runtime Option C: Side-load images

This is only required if choosing to
[side-load images](#images-option-c-side-load-images).
Make sure that the directory `/var/snap/k8s/common/images` directory exists,
then copy all `$image.tar` to that directory, such that containerd automatically
picks them up and imports them when it starts.
Copy the `images.tar` file(s) to `/var/snap/k8s/common/images`

> on each cluster node.

Reviewer: nit; "repeat this step for all cluster nodes"

   Please follow the instructions for the desired registry deployment.
2. Using [regsync][regsync], load all images from the upstream source and
   push to your registry mirror.
3. Configure the Canonical Kubernetes container runtime (`containerd`) to load
   images from
   the private registry mirror instead of the upstream source. This will be
   described in the [Configure registry mirrors](
      #Container-Runtime-Option-B:-Configure-registry-mirrors) section.

In order to load images into the private registry, you need a machine with
access to both any upstream registries (e.g. `docker.io`)
and the private mirror.

##### Load images with regsync

We recommend using [regsync][regsync] to copy images
from the upstream registry to your private registry.
For the images used in the k8s-snap we currently sync upstream images
to the `ghcr.io` repo.
For a similar task, it may be helpful to refer to the
[upstream-images.yaml][upstream-imgs] file as well as the
[sync-images][sync-images] script.

Using the output from `sudo k8s list-images`,
create a yaml file with the images to sync to the private registry.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->
```yaml

> # my-images.yaml

Reviewer: this should go next to the `upstream-images.yaml`, maybe call it something like `sync-images.yaml`

Add a warning that they should update the file with their mirror, and they also need to specify a mirror for `ghcr.io` that points to the registry if this method is followed

required. Ensure that the dummy gateway rule survives a node reboot.
```

#### Ensure proxy access

This section is only relevant if access to upstream image registries
(e.g. docker.io, quay.io, rocks.canonical.com, etc.)
is only allowed through an HTTP proxy (e.g. [squid][squid]).

Ensure that all nodes can use the proxy to access the image registry.
For example, if using `http://squid.internal:3128` to access docker.io,
an easy way to test connectivity is:

```
export https_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128
curl -v https://registry-1.docker.io/v2
```

### Images

All workloads in a Kubernetes cluster are running as an OCI image.
Kubernetes needs to be able to fetch these images and load them
into the container runtime, in order to run workloads.
For a Canonical Kubernetes deployment, you will need to fetch the images
used by its features (network, dns, etc) as well as any images that are
needed to run your workloads.

The following options are presented in the order of
increasing complexity of implementation.
You may also find it helpful to combine these options for your scenario.

If you already have the `k8s` snap installed,
you can list the images in use like this:

```bash

> ubuntu@demo:~$ sudo k8s list-images

Reviewer: nit; this command does not require sudo

ghcr.io/canonical/cilium-operator-generic:1.15.2-ck2
ghcr.io/canonical/cilium:1.15.2-ck2
ghcr.io/canonical/coredns:1.11.1-ck4
ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/pause:3.10
ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-node-driver-registrar:v2.10.1
ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-provisioner:v5.0.1
ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-resizer:v1.11.1
ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-snapshotter:v8.0.1
ghcr.io/canonical/metrics-server:0.7.0-ck0
ghcr.io/canonical/rawfile-localpv:0.8.0-ck5
```

A list of images can also be found in the downloaded k8s snap for the

> `images.txt` file.

Reviewer: The list of images can also by looking at `images.txt`, if you unsquash the downloaded k8s.snap

    type: image
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-provisioner:v5.0.1
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-provisioner:v5.0.1'
    type: image
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-resizer:v1.11.1
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-resizer:v1.11.1'
    type: image
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-snapshotter:v8.0.1
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/k8s-snap/sig-storage/csi-snapshotter:v8.0.1'
    type: image
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/metrics-server:0.7.0-ck0
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/metrics-server:0.7.0-ck0'
    type: image
  - source: ghcr.io/canonical/rawfile-localpv:0.8.0-ck5
    target: '{{ env "MIRROR" }}/canonical/rawfile-localpv:0.8.0-ck5'
    type: image
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD013 -->

After you have updated the yaml file, use [regctl][regctl] to sync the images.
Run the [sync-images][sync-images] script in `./build-scripts/hack`:

```bash
USERNAME="$username" PASSWORD="$password" MIRROR="$mirror" ./sync-images.sh \
once -c ./my-images.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: this is not correct. first, the correct tool is `regsync` not `regctl`

Secondly, the `sync-images.sh` script syncs from `upstream-images.yaml` in the repo. Instead, show how people can use regsync with their custom yaml:

Assuming your registry mirror is at http://10.10.10.10:5050

```
USERNAME="$username" PASSWORD="$password" MIRROR="10.10.10.10:5050" ./src/k8s/tools/regsync.sh once -c ./my-images.yaml
```

Now that you have fulfilled all steps in preparation for your
air-gapped cluster, it is time to deploy it.

### Step 1: Install Canonical Kubernetes

Copy the `k8s.snap`, `k8s.assert`, `core20.snap` and `core20.assert` files into
the target node, then install the k8s snap by running:

```bash
sudo snap ack core20.assert && sudo snap install ./core20.snap
sudo snap ack k8s.assert && sudo snap install ./k8s.snap --classic
```

Repeat the above for all nodes of the cluster.

### Step 2: Container Runtime

The container runtime needs to be configured to be able to fetch images.

#### Container Runtime Option A: Configure HTTP proxy for registries

Edit `/etc/systemd/system/snap.k8s.containerd.service.d/http-proxy.conf`
on each node and set the appropriate http_proxy, https_proxy and
no_proxy variables as described in the
[adding proxy configuration section][proxy].

#### Container Runtime Option B: Configure registry mirrors

This requires that you have already setup a registry mirror,
as explained in the preparation section on the private registry mirror.
Complete the following instructions on all nodes.
For each upstream registry that you want to mirror, create a `hosts.toml` file.

> This example configured `http://10.100.100.100:5000` as a mirror for

Reviewer: Use the same mirror URL as here, and point it to `ghcr.io` instead.

# Installing Canonical Kubernetes Offline or in an air gapped environment

There are situations where it is necessary or desirable to run Canonical 
Kubernetes on a machine that is not connected to the internet. 
Based on different degrees of separation from the network,
different solutions are offered to accomplish this goal.
This guide explains the necessary preparation required for the
offline installation and walks you through the different potential scenarios.

## Prepare for Deployment

In preparation for the offline deployment you will download the Canonical
Kubernetes snap, fulfill the networking requirements based on your scenario and
handle images for workloads and Canonical Kubernetes features.

### Prep 1: Download the Canonical Kubernetes snap

From a machine with access to the internet download the following:

```bash

> sudo snap download k8s --channel 1.30-classic/beta

Reviewer: link to the explanation page about which channel/revision to pick

add a `--basename k8s` flag and remove the `mv` commands below.

sudo snap download core20
sudo mv k8s_*.snap k8s.snap
sudo mv k8s_*.assert k8s.assert
sudo mv core20_*.snap core20.snap
sudo mv core20_*.assert core20.assert
```

> The [core20][Core20] and `k8s` snap are downloaded. The `core20.assert` and 
> `k8s.assert` files, are necessary to verify the integrity of the snap packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [core20][Core20] and `k8s` snap are downloaded. `core20.assert` and 
`k8s.assert` are necessary to verify the integrity of the snap packages.
```

```{note} Update the version of k8s by adjusting the channel parameter.

>     Find the version you desire in the [snapstore](https://snapcraft.io/k8s).```

Reviewer: link the explanation docs on the channel, not the snapstore page.

```{note} With updates to the snap the base core is subject to change.```

### Prep 2: Network Requirements

Air-gap deployments are typically associated with a number of constraints and
restrictions with the networking connectivity of the machines.
Verify that your cluster nodes can communicate, machines have a default gateway

> and optionally ensure proxy access.

Reviewer: This does not apply to all offline installs we care about. Keep a more generic wording like "Below we discuss the requirements that the deployment needs to fulful"

#### Network Requirement: Cluster node communication
<!-- TODO: Services and Ports Doc -->
Ensure that all cluster nodes are reachable from each other.
Refer to [Services and ports][svc-ports] used for a list of all network ports

> used by Canonical Kubernetes.

Reviewer: add as a comment while the doc is not there. you can also add this reference doc as part of this PR

#### Network Requirement: Default Gateway

Kubernetes services use the default network interface of the machine

> for the means of node discovery:

Reviewer: `for the means of node discovery` is a different thing. Let's try `to pick a default network address`.

> - kube-apiserver (part of kubelite) 

Reviewer: this is not part of kubelite

>   - uses the default network interface to advertise this address to 

Reviewer: this was the case for microk8s. in canonical kubernetes, the node address is defined and well-known when bootstrapping the cluster. instead of writing this, let's instead include the `--advertise-address` flag in kube-apiserver (using the node IP)

Reviewer: this would render the whole section about a default gateway irrelevant, as we can fully configure the necessary services

    other nodes in the cluster.
  - Without a default route kube-apiserver does not start.

> - kubelet (part of kubelite)

Reviewer: this is not part of kubelite

>   - uses the default network interface to pick the node's InternalIP address.

Reviewer: kubelet sets `--node-ip`, so this is not relevant

>   - A default gateway greatly simplifies the process of setting up the

Reviewer: this is not part of kubelet

    network feature.

In case your air gap environment does not have a default gateway,
you can add a dummy default route on interface eth0 using the following command:

```bash
ip route add default dev eth0
```

```{note} Confirm the name of your default network interface used for pod-to-pod
    communication by running "ip a".
```

```{note} The dummy gateway will only be used by the Kubernetes services to 
    know which interface to use,
    actual connectivity to the internet is not required.
    Ensure that the dummy gateway rule survives a node reboot.
```

#### (Optional) Network Requirement: Ensure proxy access

Please skip this section, if you can't use an HTTP proxy (e.g. squid)
with limited access to 

> image registries (e.g. docker.io, quay.io, rocks.canonical.com, etc).

Reviewer: "This is only required if access to upstream image registries (...) is only allowed through an HTTP proxy (e.g. squid)"

Ensure that all nodes can use the proxy to access the image registry.
In this example we use squid as an http proxy.
This set up uses http://squid.internal:3128 to access docker.io.

> Test the connectivity:

Reviewer: Careful, we are not discussing about a particular "set up". Try this instead:

> Ensure that all nodes can use the proxy to access the registry. For example, if using `http://squid.internal:3128` to access docker.io, an easy way to test connectivity is:

into the container runtime, in order to run workloads.
For a Canonical Kubernetes deployment, you will need to fetch the images
used by its features (network, dns, etc) as well as any images that are
needed to run your workloads.

The following options are presented in the order of
increasing complexity of implementation.
You may also find it helpful to combine these options for your scenario.

If you already have a running cluster,
you can list the images in use by running:
  
```bash
sudo k8s kubectl get node -o template='{{ range .items }}{{ .metadata.name }}\
{{":"}}{{ range .status.images }}{{ "\n- " }}{{ index .names 1 }}\
{{ end }}{{"\n"}}{{ end }}'
```

### Images Option A: via an HTTP proxy

In many cases, the nodes of the airgap deployment may not have direct access to
upstream registries, but can reach them through the
[use of an HTTP proxy][proxy].

To configure the proxy, edit `/etc/squid/squid.conf` and set the appropriate
allowed networks and domains. 

Upon changes to the proxy configuration,
restart both the squid proxy and the k8s snap with:

```bash
sudo systemctl restart squid
```
  
```bash
sudo snap restart k8s

> ```

Reviewer: there is more to configuring a squid proxy for dockerhub or a registry mirror, remove this as it is out of scope of this document

to access any upstream image registry,
it is typical to deploy a private registry mirror.
This is an image registry service that contains all the required OCI Images
(e.g. [registry](https://distribution.github.io/distribution/),
[Harbor](https://goharbor.io/) or any other OCI registry) and
is reachable from all cluster nodes.

This requires three steps:

1. Deploy and secure the registry service. This is out of scope for this
   document, please follow the instructions for the registry
   that you want to deploy.
2. Load all images from the upstream source and push to your registry mirror.
3. Configure the Canonical Kubernetes container runtime (`containerd`) to load 
   images from
   the private registry mirror instead of the upstream source. This will be
   described in the installation section.

In order to load images into the private registry, you need a machine with
access to both the upstream registry (e.g. `docker.io`) and the internal one.
Loading the images is possible with `docker` or `ctr`.

For the examples below we assume that a private registry mirror is running at
`10.100.100.100:5000`.

> #### Load images with ctr

Reviewer: for images, we should point people to use `regsync` instead.

consider adding links to:
- https://github.com/canonical/k8s-snap/blob/332ce3032b1cc811a671a1a4f5c647dcdd3d4175/build-scripts/hack/upstream-images.yaml, with instructions to adjust the target for their own registry mirror
- https://github.com/canonical/k8s-snap/blob/5b35ff89cce6dfa7c2b226cd7423c4630cf48756/build-scripts/hack/sync-images.sh to sync the images

in the past we referred people to `ctr` and `docker` for lack of a better alternative, which we now have and can fully control/version

Author: Ah, super helpful. Thanks Angelos!

Ensure you grab all images from all nodes in the cluster.
  
If we have an OCI image called nginx.tar,
we can load this to all the cluster nodes by running the following command
on any of them:

```bash
sudo k8s ctr image import - < nginx.tar
```
<!-- TODO: I think ctr is already installed where? -->
On success, the output will look like this:

```bash
unpacking docker.io/library/nginx:latest \
(sha256:9c58d14962869bf1167bdef6a6a3922f607aa823196c392a1785f45cdc8c3451)...d
```

For all standard OCI images that you will use, from .tar archives.

## Deploy Canonical Kubernetes

Now that you have fulfilled all steps in preparation for your
air gapped cluster, it is time to get it deployed.

### Step 1: Install Canonical Kubernetes

Copy the `k8s.snap`, `k8s.assert`, `core20.snap` and `core20.assert` files into
the target node, then install with:

```bash
sudo snap ack core20.assert && sudo snap install ./core20.snap
sudo snap ack k8s.assert && sudo snap install ./k8s.snap --classic
```

Repeat the above for all nodes of the cluster.

### Step 2: Form Canonical Kubernetes cluster

Now are ready to bootstrap the cluster by running:

```bash

> sudo k8s bootstrap

Reviewer: here, let's add `--address $IP`. we specify the address, therefore we can configure all Kubernetes services accordingly

```

```{note}  Please skip the following section for one node deployments. ```

You can add and remove nodes as described in the
[add-and-remove-nodes tutorial][nodes].

After a while, confirm that all the cluster nodes show up in
the output of the `sudo k8s kubectl get node`. 

The nodes will most likely be in `NotReady` state,
since we still need to ensure the container runtime can fetch images.

### Step 3: Container Runtime

#### Container Runtime Option A: Configure HTTP proxy for registries

Edit `/etc/environment` and set the appropriate http_proxy, https_proxy and
no_proxy variables as described in the
[adding proxy configuration section][proxy].

Then restart the k8s snap with:

```bash
sudo snap restart k8s
```

> 

Reviewer: let's avoid this advice, as this is known to cause lots of problems. instead, let's document the use of a `/etc/systemd/system/snap.k8s.containerd.conf.d/env.conf` file, that is specific to the containerd service.

#### Container Runtime Option B: Configure registry mirrors

This requires that you have already setup a registry mirror,
as explained in the preparation section on the private registry mirror.

Assuming the registry mirror is at 10.100.100.100:5000, edit 
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`

> and make sure it looks like this:

Reviewer: Explain that for each upstream registry that a mirror will be used, we need to create a `hosts.toml` file. Then, describe that this example documents configuring `http://10.100.100.100:5000` as a mirror for `docker.io`

##### HTTP registry

In `/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`
add the configuration:

```
[host."http://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
```

Please replace the registry ip with your own.

##### HTTPS registry

HTTPS requires that you additionally specify the registry CA certificate.
Copy the certificate to
`/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/ca.crt`,

Then we add our config in
`/var/snap/microk8s/current/args/certs.d/docker.io/hosts.toml`:

```
[host."https://10.100.100.100:5000"]
capabilities = ["pull", "resolve"]
ca = "/var/snap/k8s/common/etc/containerd/hosts.d/docker.io/ca.crt"
```

> Please replace the registry ip with your own.

Reviewer: we should already have said that this is an example, so this line is not needed.

#### Container Runtime Option C: Side-load images

Copy the images.tar file to each of the cluster nodes and
run the following command:

```bash
k8s ctr image import - < images.tar

> ```

Reviewer: Replace with copy the `images.tar` file(s) to `/var/snap/k8s/common/images` on each cluster node, also see above

change the sync target to your private registry mirror.

```yaml

> # upstream-images.yaml

Reviewer: let's add an example file from our current images (rocks + synced images). (you can use the `k8s list-images` command to see the full list).

this is because `upstream-images.yaml` is serving a different purpose and could confuse people.

If we have an OCI image called nginx.tar,
we can load this to all the cluster nodes by running the following command
on any of them:

```bash

> sudo k8s ctr image import - < nginx.tar

Reviewer: This is the behaviour we should document
